# DML-Price-Adjsutment
It is evident that fluctuations in the crude oil market directly affect the costs of fuel-intensive construction activities in transportation projects. To hedge against the financial risks of fuel price escalation, contractors often embed risk premiums into their bids. In turn, state departments of transportation (DOTs) include fuel price adjustment clauses (PACs) as risk-sharing mechanisms in contracts to reduce bid prices and limit price variation. Although most state DOTs use fuel PACs, empirical evidence on their effectiveness in influencing bidding outcomes remains limited. To address this gap, this study empirically evaluates the effectiveness of PACs in shaping contractor bidding behavior—specifically in lowering unit prices and reducing bid cost variation—using 21,108 item-level bid data from 2,878 highway construction projects across seven states. We employed double machine learning, a causal inference framework that uses machine learning models to adjust for nonlinear relationships and high-dimensional confounders. Results indicated that the inclusion of fuel PACs, in overall, reduced unit bid prices, but it had no statistically significant effect on price variation. Subgroup analyses across four fuel-intensive construction categories—base, embankment, excavation, and pavement—revealed heterogeneous effects. PAC inclusion had the greatest impact in the excavation category, where PACs led to statistically significant reductions in both bid prices and price variation. However, no positive effects were observed in the base and embankment categories. These findings indicate that PACs can positively influence bid pricing, with the most substantial effects observed in high-risk, fuel-sensitive categories like excavation—where both bid levels and cost variability show significant improvements.
